welcome to topcast and for an impromptu
ask me anything episode i was
interviewed just yesterday by iona
atalia who is the editor of array
magazine and the link to that magazine
is in the description to this video it
was a great conversation it took a lot
of meandering turns and unfortunately i
didn't get to
most of the questions that were asked of
me on twitter
and so i thought i'd make up for it by
doing this particular episode arrayo
magazine is all about progress and
humanism and science and philosophy and
is well worth your looking into and your
support if you can so again
link in the description for that i
should say i like these ask me anything
episodes this is the third one that i've
done
and i like them because they're very
little effort on my part i don't have to
go preparing anything like with all my
other episodes that are devoted to books
and particular ideas and
exploration of those ideas i can just
sit down and treat it kind of like an
interview where people are asking me
questions on twitter and i just answer
them off the top of my head so no
preparation and i guess very little
editing unless i really stuff up along
the way so without further ado let's get
into the questions and the first one is
asked by arjun khamani who is a prolific
writer and tweeter but particularly
writer on sub stack he has a wonderful
little magazine happening there a blog
kind of thing well worth checking out
links in the description he's just also
started a podcast and i've been
interviewed by arjun recently for his
podcast and arjun asks
why are problems inevitable well that's
a great one so often this is treated
this question
or this statement rather this claim
problems are inevitable it's kind of
treated as almost axiomatic and i guess
in a sense it is but
all axioms have an explanation behind
them somewhere there's a
reason for thinking them or reason for
thinking that they are good starting
points you can have any old starting
point that you like but these ones are
particularly good this idea of problems
being inevitable
why are problems inevitable well my
answer would be because
we exist
human beings people exist and basically
that's it that's why problems are
inevitable
we human beings create knowledge and
that knowledge is error-prone and
because those of those errors
we can only survive by correcting them
in the long run now more broadly you
might say
that
problems are inevitable because life
exists because life exists there are
problems and only well only people kind
of have problem situations really only
people can have problems so once you've
got a universe with people in them
people in it rather then you've got
problems in that universe because people
encounter problems so maybe the question
is
why
do people find problems inevitable okay
in a universe without people there might
not be problems although you might argue
that other animals could encounter
problems individuals of a species i
guess have this instinct to survive so
perhaps that's a problem situation of a
kind or perhaps maybe just the genes
have a problem the problem of how to get
replicated but i kind of think that
might be a step too far better to think
of problems as
conflicts between ideas and what has
ideas again people genes don't really
have ideas butterflies birds and badgers
don't have ideas in my
perspective on all of this stuff they
have instincts other animals have
instincts but that's different let's not
get into that right now and just stick
with why are problems inevitable so
problems are inevitable because of the
existence of people and people have this
special relationship with the universe
we are a perspective
on the universe each of us have our own
perspective on the universe and in
particular a perspective on time
we know things change in this universe
from our perspective from the
perspective that we occupy
we observe the change over time now from
a god's eye view if you could get
outside of the multiverse or if you
could just if you or if you just think
in terms of the everetti and multiverse
perspective what happens
in a sense in fact whether you're or not
you endorse the everettian multiverse or
not what happens in
what happens happens by virtue of the
laws of physics mandating what goes on
things are determined
but
that's kind of irrelevant to this
particular issue because again we're
worried about why problems should be
inevitable but there's no what i'm
saying there is there's no universal
problem it's not like from a god's eye
perspective you look down and you go ah
there are the problems things are just
kind of happening
or are they because people are making
choices as well so we don't fully know
the connection between consciousness
creativity and determinism i have my
perspective on all of that
however from
what we do know our best explanation at
the moment is that we people in the
universe are conscious and our conscious
experience of the universe
means that we are located we're located
at a particular place at a particular
time
and change happens the past does not
resemble the future and so we're
constantly encountering the unknown the
stuff that we don't understand which is
problematic it can be a bad problem that
might cause a suffering that might cause
us a threat a threat to our survival in
some way but just in general
it causes conflicts between our ideas we
observe something that doesn't fit
with what we already know and so the
unknown is bringing with it problems
that's why
problems are inevitable because people
are the entities that have problems
people are conscious beings
located at
the present moment
the present moment he separates the past
from the future and the future is
almost entirely unknown
the past is also unknown and so it can
be problematic as well but the fact is
we're in this universe of unknowns
time is the thing that distinguishes
between
states that have been known in the past
and states that cannot possibly be known
until we encounter them bringing with
them problems and so
the universe is in a state of flux and
all of that together is why problems are
inevitable so i hope that
answers arjun's question
uh now moving on reading jitin jittens
asked a question on twitter as well
jitun terakola
there are differences between men and
women
they have different propensities for
doing things right chitin
what explains this when we're all
universal explainers
each capable of doing what any other
person can do
well excuse me while i have a little
drink of my tea
okay yeah this is uh
i get i get a sense that people on
twitter
now and again
seem to imply
that
what i kind of put out there in terms of
my perspectives on this would suggest
that there shouldn't be differences
between men and women that once you get
go down this path of well all human
beings are universal explainers so we
are fundamentally the same in that
respect why aren't we the same then in
particular why are there these
systematic differences between the
genders
you know weigh in on all of this stuff
about gender brett go on
all right well
here's
what i would say about it the sensation
of
testosterone and testicles is different
to the sensation of progesterone
estrogen and ovaries among other things
so those physical things the chemicals
the hormones and the physical structures
of the body
do indeed serve as sources of
problems ideas sensations so it is
unsurprising that we
males versus females do develop some
differences different tendencies
different propensities
that's one thing it can certainly
uh the the the different hormones the
different the physical structures of the
body
can manifest and can
manifest themselves as different
behaviors even as early as in utero and
immediately after birth as well all
parents who have a
daughter and a son can tell you the
difference they tend to act differently
and teachers can tell you this as well
anyone who encounters you know lots of
little boys and lots of little girls can
tell you there is a difference between
them in terms of their behavior that
seems to come from their genetics now
i'm not saying it's determined by
genetics i'm saying that genetics has an
influence on certain things like certain
hormones certain chemicals that then go
on to provide different sensations
different feelings different
ways of observing stuff in the world
coloring the observations in the world
now it's not to say that that those that
that coloring so to speak uh can't be
error corrected so that people can
converge on the same truth it's not to
say any of that of course we can and
we're universal we can come to
understand the
same truths and the same knowledge about
the universe that's what the
universality is about but
early on very early on in life the mere
presence of the different ways in which
males and females develop means very
early on soon after their birth they're
treated
by everyone around them not just their
parents by everyone else
slightly differently and this has
ongoing consequences for their behaviour
and their behavior is determined by the
ideas they take on their memes and so
they end up developing systematically
slightly different mean plexus sets of
ideas that control their behavior
determine their behavior so
so
little boys and little girls have
different hormones have different
physical structures these physical
structures and these hormones
determine subtly slightly different
behaviors which go on to determine
slightly different ways in which
the adults and other children around
them treat them
and simply by virtue of the fact knowing
that they are boys and girls but even if
they didn't know they're a boy or a girl
the boy and the girl
boy versus the girl acts differently in
the world and so are treated differently
in the world and therefore go on to have
uh reinforced behavior that is different
in the world as well and so you get this
sort of ratcheting up effect of
differences between the genders
differences between the sexes i am
deliberately conflating those two words
now they're both universal explainers of
course but okay let's let's imagine them
let's imagine a a thought experiment
okay
perhaps the first ever
or some some early agi that are created
here's my thought experiment for you we
take this
newly generated artificial general
intelligence and we put them in
identical robot bodies okay you can
imagine these robot bodies as
sophisticated as you like
human looking as you like but outwardly
perfectly identical robot bodies in some
way shape or form
now what we do is we're going to raise
these this would be an unethical um
experiment by the way but but imagine
you raise them in two different houses
two different two separated homes
one is raised in a rather solid dark
sharply edged place with large windows
and no mirrors
the interior of that particular home is
huge but the outside yard is really
small and this is where the first agi
grows up or at least spends perhaps one
year of its early life in this
particular environment
now the other is raised in a
softer filled with cushions and bright
but with curved surfaces everywhere
instead of sharp edges and small windows
and lots of mirrors the interior of this
home is small but outside the yard is
large and this is where they spend their
first year or so of development from
let's say conception through to when
they take their first tentative steps
outside into the world beyond now
both of these two agi
receive the same number of visitors and
indeed the same visitors and have very
very similar interactions with the
visitors that they have maybe they even
can watch the same television shows and
so on does anyone think that those these
systematic differences between the two
will make
no difference to their personalities
whatsoever
yet sure they're both universal
explainers
but they will necessarily by dent of
their starting points their internal
physically limited starting points so to
speak diverge in some ways
and those raised in the sharp edge dark
but outward looking place with a small
yard
tend to systematically would tend to
systematically resemble if you let's say
you repeated the experiment over time
you did this again and again and again
with different cohorts of of people of
artificial general intelligences then
you would expect the ones that are
raised in that dark sharp edged place
but which was able to see outside into a
rather small yard to systematically
resemble those ones that are raised in a
similar environment just like that and
the ones and they would be different too
in systematic ways in similar ways
two
the ones raised in the curved surface
bright but inward looking place with
lots of mirrors but it has a larger yard
now how exactly will they differ i don't
know i don't know but
i can predict they will behave
differently over time because of the
ways what they're able to observe
the kind of conjectures that they will
have about
sharp versus curved surfaces are small
windows versus large windows the absence
or presence of mirrors
big yards and small yards dark versus
bright internal lighting that all that
sort of stuff is going to have some
impact now i'm using that nearly as an
analogy an analogy to well what's it
like to have testosterone for the first
well
throughout your entire life versus
having a predominance of cycles of
estrogen and progesterone throughout
your entire life what's the difference
there what does it do it does something
it provides some input into one's mind
and and all we need to do is to observe
what happens out there in reality that
there are these differences between
males and females and i i cannot say
that it's due entirely utterly entirely
to just the way in which they're
socialized that's not the case because
we know as a matter of biology there are
physical differences between the sexes
and those physical differences
not only cause
social reactions from other people but
cause an internal subjective experience
which is different between the sexes as
well a systematic difference that is
similar between the sexes between
members of the same sex now can boys and
girls learn to do exactly the opposite
can a boy learn to behave like a girl
and can a girl learn to behave like a
boy and what is this behaving like a boy
and behaving like a girl well precisely
what it is in different cultures
different cultures have slightly
different ways of boys and girls
behaving modulo all of those differences
there are differences right there are
differences every culture throughout
history has been able to recognize that
there are these differences between the
sexes not merely physically but
behaviorally and as i keep using this
word systematically in other words
reliably you can tell the differences
and list the features of the ways in
which boys behave versus the ways in
which girls behave i know it might be
politically incorrect but people can do
it
children can do it what are the typical
characteristics of a boy doesn't mean
that all boys will have these
characteristics what are the typical
characteristics of the girl not meaning
that all girls will share these
characteristics and there will be a lot
of overlap okay lots
more people have
written and commented on this stuff some
people make entire careers on this sort
of stuff
talking about this sort of stuff i don't
find that hugely interesting except
where it comes to bear on this kind of
thing because where it crosses over to
this concept of universal explainer is
that yes in theory a boy could learn to
behave exactly like a girl and a girl
could learn to behave exactly like a boy
there is this capacity for us to do so
now it's not always easy and some boys
do tend to act
do tend to have more feminine traits and
some girls to have tend to have more
masculine traits great that's just
more grist for the mill for the case i'm
making that we are universal explainers
but just because we're universally
explained it doesn't mean we should all
be the same in fact precisely the
opposite it means that we should all be
different okay universal explainer means
that you have a
spectrum of different possibilities
before you
all of which you could take on but you
don't because you can't because you can
only possibly take on a particular
personality modulo the people who say
they have multiple personalities and all
that sort of stuff okay that aside the
fact is
we are
universal explainers of a kind
instantiated in biology which provides
us with certain sensations and certain
tendencies certain propensities as we
say
but
that is just to say we are biological
organisms
with these tendencies due to different
physical structures
that the sexes have
but we're not fundamentally biological
organisms
which is where i disagree with
evolutionary psychologists and so on
fundamentally we are minds
and there is not a
feminine mind and a masculine mind
there's just minds minds are universal
explainers
individual members of the
class of universal explainers
can be grouped in different ways they
could be grouped as males and females
okay but there will be differences you
won't be able to pick one person
randomly and say well here is what one
must do to qualify as being a male
member of the species because of these
features of the mind that's not
what we're saying here at all a mind is
a mind as a mind in terms of its
capacity to create knowledge to explain
stuff to take interest in things to make
choices out in the world and all of
those features that make a mind of mind
and different to what any other living
system that hear the two we know about
now the interesting thing is of course
with respect to this question
when we get artificial general
intelligence presumably it won't be
based in biology maybe it will be but
assuming it's not assuming it's
programmed in a computer in some way
then it won't have
this testosterone progesterone thing i'm
saying it presumably won't have
testicles versus ovaries presumably it
won't have
a particular
male type or female type body but it
will one would hope have a body of some
kind which will determine the kind of
sensations that it tends to experience
and if you
manufacture isn't the right word here
but but if artificial general
intelligence tends to be created with a
certain kind of body you could imagine a
situation where there are two different
kinds of bodies that artificial general
intelligences could be instantiated in
and those two different kinds of bodies
would over time produce subtly different
personalities or perhaps markedly
different personalities between the two
populations
even though there would be a whole lot
of overlap
there would still be these systematic
differences over time you can imagine
giving an artificial intelligence wheels
couldn't you or you know there's a kind
of created with wheels and one created
with legs there would be systematic
differences over time the sensation of
what it's like to
roll is going to be different to the
sensation of walking and running okay
again an analogy to
the different sensation of having
different parts of your anatomy if
you're a boy versus a girl okay
that's a long answer on that particular
question next question is asked by david
hearn now i should mention david is on
twitter at david underscore hearn
h-u-r-n well worth following
if only for his likes
he tends to like all this really
interesting science stuff so i don't
need to bother following all of these
great science communicators and great
scientists out there because david does
it for me he tends to
like these interesting tweets and the
the output of all these great scientists
and thinkers and so i just look at
david's likes now and again and that's
enough for me and he also has
some uh great replies to people he's one
of the the most subtle and humorous
repliers to um
to lots of intellectual stuff on twitter
as well so follow david hearn
and he asks david asks
with the right knowledge can we change
the laws of physics slash reality or can
we only get around them
optimism okay so i've got a feeling
knowing david from a distance knowing
david from twitter this is a kind of
tongue-in-cheek
question almost he knows the answer
we can't get around the laws of physics
we can't get around whatever the
constraints are the limitations that
physics places upon us now why is this
well the laws of physics are just the
laws that govern physical stuff and we
are made of physical stuff so we can't
possibly
contravene the laws that govern
everything including us and nor should
we want to i mean the whole idea here is
that the laws of physics prohibit
certain stuff but in doing so they tell
you what is possible what we're able to
do the laws of physics themselves are
not a problem not our problem they allow
us to see what the problems are in other
words the stuff that's possible but
which we haven't yet been able to
accomplish but we want to do so so
no
the right knowledge does not allow us to
change the laws of physics no matter how
powerful we get we cannot possibly
change the laws of physics unless we
could get out of physical reality in
some way outside of the multiverse in
some way i guess never say never who
knows but you know like what's a law
effect you can't
matter can't travel at the speed of
light let alone beyond the speed of
light is that a problem uh in a sense
but it doesn't actually place a
prohibition on you getting anywhere in
the universe the interesting thing about
relativity is
as you approach the speed of light
time dilates okay
anything outside of you if you're the
thing that's moving close to the speed
of light all the clocks outside of you
every single
process outside of your
frame of reference so to speak which is
what they call it
slows down slows down moving clocks tick
slowly
and then with general relativity it gets
more complicated so when i say moving
clocks tick slowly if if you're moving
you would think your clock is moving but
in your frame of reference if
here i am in my room here if this room
was suddenly
accelerated to you know near the speed
of light nothing would appear to be
unusual to me apart from the forces
required to accelerate me to near the
speed of light but
the wristwatch that i might be wearing
or the clock upon the wall appears to
tick normally but if i look out the
window at any clock that is zipping by
well the whole concept of relativity is
is it me that if i'm moving at constant
velocity is it me that's moving or is it
the outside that's moving these two
situations are equivalent if i look
outside then what i see
is every physical process every ticking
clock ticking more slowly every physical
process moving more slowly
and then when you slow down you
accelerate stuff
weird stuff happens as well
what am i getting at here what's this
got to do with the changing laws so if
you wanted to
you might say well
what if we wanted to travel to the
nearest
large spiral galaxy to us near a spiral
galaxy to us it's the andromeda galaxy
the andromeda galaxy is 2.2 million
light years away and we've just said
well you can't travel at the speed of
light if you're something made of matter
is this
this particular law this this being
unable to travel at the speed of light
if you're made of matter which is what
human beings are and what your rocket
would be made of presumably as well
even if you could
remove somehow the mass
if you could remove the mass from matter
so that you were weightless then you
could travel at the speed of light but
there's no getting beyond the speed of
light so far as we know so let's say
that's a physical law
is this a problem for getting to
somewhere like the andromeda galaxy if
that's where you want to get to and well
perhaps surprisingly to some people the
answer is no you might say well hold on
if the andromeda galaxy is 2.2 million
light years away if you're traveling at
the speed of light surely it takes you
2.2 million years to get there
ah
yes and no
if you're an observer here on earth
watching the spaceship travel
to the andromeda galaxy then yes if that
spaceship was traveling at the speed of
light remembering that a car but let's
say it's it's traveling at the there's a
slight fraction below the speed of light
by some mechanism
known in the distant future we've also
got problems there of accelerating such
a mass to
so very close to the speed of light you
need a lot of energy in order to get
that mass and as as because
as the as that mass of the rocket and
the person the passengers on the rocket
as it gets closer and closer to the
speed of light that the mass dilates the
thing that gains it's harder and harder
to accelerate the thing closer and
closer to the speed of light requiring
more and more energy the energy quickly
exceeds all the energy that is available
in the galaxy okay you can do these
calculations that aside
let's say that we can travel through
space at the speed of light
we've covered that somehow or other by
removing the mass from mata
doesn't it take 2.2 million years to get
there and a human being doesn't live for
2.2 million years and wouldn't it be a
boring journey anyway if you're going
all the way from here to there and it's
going to take 2.2 million years well
if again if you're here on earth then
according to observers on the earth who
are stationary
they will measure it that it takes 2.2
million years
but for you
on the spaceship that is traveling at
the speed of light you can get there
instantly photons get everywhere
instantly now if this has just freaked
you out
then i just encourage you to
do a little research into relativity
theory the faster you go the more
lengths contract and and at the limit
when you get to the speed of light
lengths contract to zero
and so because of that a photon that
leaves here on earth and travels to the
andromeda galaxy gets there instantly in
its frame of reference it experiences no
time passing okay photons experience no
time passing i know mind bending and
let's say you're just traveling ever so
slightly slower
than the speed of light then you won't
get there instantly but you'll get there
very very quickly arbitrarily quickly in
fact you know if you you there is such a
velocity that if you left the earth and
wanted to get to the andromeda galaxy
2.2 million light years away that it
would only take you ten years
or one year or ten minutes or one minute
and for photons as i say instantly so
that law of physics
which places a prohibition
on velocity okay you can't exceed the
speed of light and you can't even get to
the speed of light if you're got mass is
not
a problem for actually traveling
anywhere in the universe
because relativity allows for
uh you to get there in the universe
however of course if you want to come
back again then yeah you're going to
find everyone
that you loved and cared about and all
of civilization here on earth gone okay
because if you went all the way there
and turned around and immediately came
back traveling at the speed of light
then 2.2 million years to get there 2.2
million years to get back 4.4 million
years would have passed who knows what
for you it wouldn't have for you it's
almost instant right you almost get
there and back instantly but everyone on
the earth has the earth has experienced
4.4 million years passing and so the
earth will be very different that's a
problem
possibly for you but problems are
parochial aren't they you know that's
your problem okay you you have to make a
choice at that point if this was a
possibility for you
what's more important
being able to stay with the things and
people you care about here on earth or
travel all the way to the andromeda
galaxy
you can't have both unless you're taking
everyone and everything you care about
with you
[Laughter]
this will be a problem for interstellar
travelers of the future speaking of you
know there is that movie interstellar
which which actually um touches on on
this well worth
seeing
so thank you david hearn for that that
question that's a fun one next is from
jeff coast bourbon
at jc
bourbon uh his question is
he's written a bit on education does he
have any updated thoughts so that's me i
i have written a bit on education you
know that's where i sort of spent i
guess most of my
professional career for once of another
word excuse me
any updated thoughts
not
really i mean
i guess the only thing i emphasize is
incrementalism
because
i want to
win the argument
so to speak
that
there's a
poverty
of the entire
philosophy which and and tradition which
causes us to send children to school
i don't like it i think that um you know
school is coercive school has a whole
lot of problems it's a center of
indoctrination all of that stuff
and i think the place
should have the metaphorical bomb place
under it and we can we can get we can do
without it that said
it's it's
that is such a minority view
that there's almost no
it's not that there's no point making it
we should make the argument it's just
that it gets very little traction even
in people that are very closely allied
with
what might be regarded as the world view
that i tend to present on topcast let's
take for example the objectivists the
iron rand objectivists
they're very much about
individual human rights of course okay
the right to your own life the right to
be in control of your life all that sort
of stuff
remarkably except when it comes to
children to a large extent they they
there is still a strong tendency not
universally okay there are exceptions in
the objectivists
community movement whatever you want to
call it
who would say well children deserve full
human rights as well but
i i think that's still a minority of you
even among objectivists they think that
well you know children still need to go
off to school if only we could improve
the schools then uh it would be even
more worthwhile to send them you know
perhaps if they all had to read
atlas shrugged and the virtue of
selfishness then it would be even better
to
send the children off to this
institution even if it was coercive even
if it was compulsory and so on and so
forth which is obviously not my view
okay
even if school was
an ideal place where
i deal i say ideal where they were
learning better stuff
where everyone was sort of you know
shown the joys the true joys of science
and philosophy and karl popper and you
know
and
the beginning of infinity was the
standard text
david deutsch would be having
connections but let's say it was let's
say it was something like that
i still wouldn't you certainly wouldn't
want it to be coercive
i wouldn't want to send
kids there at all
i think kids should have the choice
so i i haven't got any updated thoughts
in respect of that i just have i guess
uh
more and more i'm emphasizing the
incrementalism because i know that there
are people within
the orbit of our
owl um you know the the the the who are
enthusiastic
um
supporters of
populion epistemology david deutscher's
worldview
these ideas about optimism there are
enthusiastic supporters for
all of that including the idea that we
should somehow undermine the present
system of schooling including all of its
coercive aspects but if we want to make
real progress towards that project
i think
within the foreseeable within perhaps
our lifetimes
then there has to be a recognition of
the fact that the majority of people are
already not with us that when they hear
about this they think craziness they
turn off
and so therefore
it has to be
an incremental dismantling of the most
coercive aspects and that is happening
in some ways it's two steps forward and
one step back
corporal punishment is by and large it
has by and large been eliminated from
the system
giving providing more choice in subjects
has
become a thing which is better okay you
can't choose to leave the school in many
many jurisdictions
britain seems to be a shiny example i've
learned about this that in fact it's not
required that you attend school but it's
required you still be educated at home
in some way and the government is going
to check
i of course think i've written on this
and i don't want to go back through the
arguments
that that children
desperately want to learn they're
enthusiastic about learning you can't
stop a child from learning
but you can stunt
their desire to learn
as a teacher as a parent as an adult
by making it uninteresting by making it
boring by turning children off children
will will actually naturally find
mathematics and poetry and music and all
of that stuff interesting
the fact that they don't mean something
that's got has gone wrong with the way
in which it's been presented to them
that's the issue
i think a lot of people know this so so
anyway in a situation where this is
going to happen in a coercive schooling
system
providing more and more choice
is the solution to that
having giving parents the capacity to
choose schools giving students the
capacity to choose teachers
and their mode of being taught at
schools
is is absolutely a positive step there
are more and more schools taking this
idea on whether whether the student does
not have to
do
the basics what are called the basics
they can choose to do other stuff and
and they find that children find that in
doing other stuff then they want to know
the stuff they thought they weren't
interested in
you know
a kid who wants to just do robotics
but they're not actually interested in
mathematics soon learns that well
coding sometimes requires a certain
amount of mathematics
and so they learn it they learn as
required
and they have fun they're more fun by
doing it because it's relevant to their
problem situation of what they want to
do
so having more choice at school
is an incremental improvement on
coercively forcing everyone to do
exactly the same subjects all the time
having the option of homeschooling
increasingly much better
than forcing everyone to go to school i
think one of the great benefits of
covert is
parents got to see have an have a
greater insight into what was being
taught at school and realized
just the absolute poverty of what goes
on in classrooms sometimes that's good
okay the standard should be higher with
respect to the standards of
teachers caring about their students
because many teachers many parents i
think saw that
some teachers not all but there are this
not insignificant minority of teachers
who were just turning it up turning up
and phoning it in
bad
so so that's an incremental improvement
in one of the virtues of something like
lockdown
lockdown had that great virtue that
suddenly everyone was being
taught from home why not let that
continue why not let that continue i'll
tell you what that that
that i thought that really that would be
a huge step towards
uh
volunteer more voluntary schooling
and let's face it i think the reality is
and this is good
when you've got home
schooling of that kind on mass
where the entire nation or at least the
entire state
population of school students is at home
going to school
they're not number one
most of the official school work
can get done not in six hours or seven
hours whatever the usual school day is
but in two or three hours okay i heard
this from from lots of people that the
the the kids were getting through
the work
much much more quickly because the
teachers weren't setting so much great
okay with okay so that that's a huge
step in the right direction
and which leaves so much more time for
the kids for the rest of the day to do
what they want and learn in particular
learn what they want
i know a lot of adults have this
view of children that if they're not
being given official lessons then
they're wasting their time
that they're
wasting their time i mean you know
learning stuff that the adults aren't
interested in
making tick tocks how terrible learning
to use the most advanced technology to
be creative how terrible
so so so that that that's all been great
uh so updated thoughts yeah let's let's
expand what happened during covert and
make it
not about when pandemics happen
let's have home schooling all the time
that's an incremental change
and if it worked then why can't it work
now
uh maybe the next generation maybe the
kids that went
through covert maybe there will be some
who who experience that for what some
years
at least perhaps a whole year of
basically school from home
maybe when they have children there will
be a not insignificant
minority perhaps majority who think that
they learned better
hopefully they remember
one of my articles on on learning was
about how
people
at school
almost universally hate the experience
even the ones who do really well
at school they they know that they'd
rather be doing something else almost
every single day
even the ones that you know turn up and
do very well you know i was one of these
kids who turned up i kind of enjoyed it
kind of
went to school and had a
broadly positive experience
that said i still
loved the days when i was off sick or
stayed at home or something else because
well you were free you were free to do
what you wanted and in my case in many
people's cases like this you
you'd learn your own stuff you wouldn't
waste the day
you'd actually read and write and do fun
stuff that that improved you as a person
which is ostensibly what school is about
anyway but tends to fail it
so perhaps we've got to look forward to
the
the next generation
if they can well what i was saying now i
just forgot what i was saying there is
that
even those kids
the kids that have a good time at school
much less the kids that had a a bad time
at school they all come out of school
and within one or two years
they talk about how wonderful school is
they forget they have these rose-colored
glasses about what school was like
ironically it's often the kids that did
worst at school who did terribly at it
who had a horrible experience who when
they have children
really want their children to go to
school and to do well at school it's
like i didn't do well at school i hated
it but hey if only you
do what i didn't do and you know really
try hard
then your life will be better in some
way not realizing that that's exactly
what their own parents were saying to
them you know try really hard at school
they didn't like it they didn't do well
and and and and and they regret not
doing well
what do you think is going to be the
experience of your own child
[Laughter]
in all likelihood they're not going to
enjoy the experience either
because that's just the nature of school
it is basically a universal truth
children like adults do not want to be
forced coerced into doing something they
don't want to do
and it doesn't have to be this way i
know there's a again that's a ubiquitous
idea the world life is just about having
to do things you don't want to do no
it's not no it's really not
for anyone who um wants more on this
follow the great lully tenant who talks
about
this whole idea of
non-coercion there's a lot of people in
this space now
you know my time is limited i i i touch
on this now and again but
um
clearly in order to flourish as a
creative human being you can't be
coerced it's it's it's antagonistic
towards
being the best person you can and this
is precisely what we do
to students to children early on in
their lives
school is serving the purpose of child
care
more or less
in our society children are doing much
of their most relevant learning outside
of the classroom technology has been a
game changer so they are learning to
create and learn in ways that people of
previous generations can barely grasp i
think to really know what's going on
and so the more that
kids can be outside the classroom
pursuing their own interests
the more we'll have
excited enthusiastic problem solvers of
the future
rather than people who
have been indoctrinated into
not only certain kinds of lessons but
lessons about lessons lessons about how
learning should take place and how the
next generation should be
enculturated into
a way of thinking which basically comes
down to
ceding your critical faculties to the
authorities okay we could go on and on
and on about this all
i was asked was do i have any updated
thoughts clearly not except if we're
going to change the minds of people the
majority of which who hold completely
different views
to the one i've just expressed there we
need to do it incrementally softly
slowly
perhaps talk up the virtues of something
like homeschooling
and then once we get there
we can look further and look further and
look further and in the limit
which it seems to me to be quite a long
way off
uh
school has gone by the wayside
there's a system of learning in place
where
if you want to learn something then you
employ the services of a
wiser more knowledgeable person and they
can tutor you in some way shape or form
um without you ever being forced uh to
to to to go to lessons
and be given answers to questions never
asked
okay
moving on
this is a question from
dink i don't know why i found this so
funny
dingbatus sapiens
at dingbat sapiens okay
and the question is
please ask him slash her i'm him please
ask him what fallibilism means
also are we a self-domesticated species
and why does adam sandler have a career
okay
what does fallibilism mean fallablism is
the stance that we can be wrong and in
my
view it entails um realism
because if you can be wrong that means
there's something to be objectively
wrong about
fallibilism is the stance that error is
everywhere and you as a person as a
human being can always be an error no
matter what it doesn't matter how
certain you are of something because
certainty is merely an emotion merely a
feeling you have
so it just means that error is
everywhere and it it gives you a certain
degree of modesty coupled with optimism
modesty on the one hand that maybe
someone else anyone else could have a
better idea than you
and optimism because if there's an error
there their errors are ubiquitous then
you can correct those errors and make
progress and things can get better
but but essentially fallibilism is the
stance that
you could always be an error you could
always be wrong that's it
okay it's the absolute opposite to
dogmatism
and many many people don't if you're not
a fallables you're a dogmatist in some
way in some way shape or form you're
dogmatic on some particular thing
doesn't matter what it is
um
it's like
you're either a dogmatist or you're not
you can't be a little bit of a dogmatist
some people are dogmatic about many
things some people are dogmatic about
one thing it's kind of like um
are you religious do you believe in god
or not oh no i you know i don't believe
in all the pantheon of hindu hindu gods
or i don't believe in the pantheon of
roman and greek god i just believe in
one of them well you're just as
still just as religious so a dogmatic
person is someone who is
anti-fallibilist about at least one
thing you know who has who says of one
particular thing well i've got no doubts
in this on this
okay
that includes fallibilism by the way
fallablism is something we can be
fallible about i can be mistaken about
it now does that mean that i would
regard fallibalism as false it just
means
that
you could have a an erroneous
understanding of what faluba can
fallablism be wrong yes can our
understanding of falliblism be wrong yes
does that mean that therefore dogmatism
must be true no
it just means that our
what we know fallablism to be could be
improved in the future and i expect that
it would be okay but at prison our best
understanding of it is what i've just
provided there that we can always be an
error
but what it means to be an error
we might gradually come to have a deeper
understanding of what that is and look
back and go that previous understanding
of what fallablism was has been
superseded by something better
also the second part of the question
also are we a self-domesticated species
i think so i guess you know
we've taught ourselves how to survive
we're the first such species i guess to
do that we we have instincts as well but
by and large the way in which we have
survived here on earth domesticated
ourselves has been through explanatory
knowledge the one unique thing that
separates us not the one unique thing
but the crucial thing that separates us
from every other
extant and extinct species on the planet
why does adam santa have a career
okay
um yeah i'm gonna tell you i know i know
it's a tongue-in-cheek
question but i'm actually gonna
take it seriously um
you know i talk on topcast about
epistemology and science physics
philosophy of science optimism
a certain amount of politics economics
that kind of thing
i don't talk about comedy even though
it's one of my deep interests you know i
don't talk about the music i like i
you know i happen to like korean pop
music specifically girl bands all the
way from
girls generation
tiara cara all the way through to today
twice
that
will ring true to some people but i
don't talk about it okay it's just one
of the things i don't talk about
there's lots of things that i'm really
interested in i don't talk about one
thing i'm really interested in
happens to be stand-up comedy i listen
to
lots of stand-up comedies and actually
my favorite podcast
apart from my own my favorite podcast is
um conan o'brien's one conan o'brien
needs a friend i love it i listened to
you know sort of religiously listen to
this one it's the guilty pleasure i
suppose and he interviews lots of really
interesting people
uh and in the same way that joe rogan
talks to lots of comedians mark maron
talks to lots of comedians i really like
hearing
not only watching stand up for the
entertainment value but there's a real
interesting parallel between
the history of comedy and why it's
developed and what goes on in science
that that that stand-up comedy seems to
get better over time
at least
there are stand-up comedians today seem
to be objectively better than what they
were in the past
what they're able to do the way they
refine their acts and so on and so forth
there are some worse comedians now there
have been some worse turns recently um
with woke comedy you know but i still
listen to even some of that
what's that got to do with anything here
why does adam stanley have a career i
say all that because
i think adam sandler is a great
stand-up comedian
he's one of these very very rare people
who
you know started off as a stand-up
comedian really wanted to get into
stand-up comedy gradually
got himself under saturn live which is
like the the objective for so many
american comedians is to try and get
onto that television show and then from
there
not merely have a viable career in
the movie and in the film industry
but become really really successful so
why does adam sandle have a career
because he's a he's a comedic genius now
you might not like it you might not like
the fact that uh you might not like his
style of comedy uh i do
[Music]
most of the famous comedian says i'm
hard-pressed to think of a comedian i
don't
really like um
but
uh you know i mentioned conan o'brien
ken o'brien
on his podcast kind of brian needs a
friend actually interviews adam sandler
and they they happen to be friends a lot
of the time conan's interviewing people
he doesn't really know but might have
appeared on his talk show the con
o'brien i think stands above
all other talk show hosts that have ever
been on american television i think he's
just objectively better than
so many of the others
not simply because he's funny although
he is that but because he
he avoids politics
he manages to speak to
to everyone okay i think that the
letterman kind of did that as well to
some extent but now of course well i
mean
it's just a car wreck as far as
the the um
that that talk show genre has gone
i mean
it's really unfortunate that unless
unless you are from a particular side of
politics
then there's nothing for you and why
these people need to keep hammering
politics i don't know but i i've long
since
basically i still
you know will watch the odd
cold bear clip
let's say but really it's just it's kind
of painful if i want politics i will go
to the news i will go to
a proper political commentator
someone whose business it is
you know have spent their lives sort of
looking into this kind of stuff but i'm
not really interested in politics in the
first place but
you know
going to a talk show hosts for for
being badgered about particular
political opinions
um is is annoying
and it's not the only source of comedy
which is why i like conan o'brien
conan o'brien has a deep understanding
of not only talk show history but comedy
as well and you can talk about the
history of comedy um
and i mention him because yeah his
interview with sandler just reveals sort
of the genius of sandler and how sandler
is well respected by other comedians
what it is he's been able to accomplish
the the the courageous way in which adam
sandler just behaves like an absolute
goose i mean it's not easy to do what he
did it's just like it's not easy for
ricky gervais to do what he does
there's comedians and then there's other
comedians there i
have great respect for anyone who's
willing to stand up on stage and do it
but there are differences between
comedians in the same way there are
differences between scientists between
the kind of risks they're willing to
take
career-wise and how they're
really able to
go to the foundations of what is either
funny or what is uh happens to be true
in science okay and and really sort of
upset apple carts so to speak
ricky gervais is a really interesting
one because i followed his career all
the way from the office and before the
off before he started the office you
know he had this radio show in
the united kingdom on xfm which went on
for a
number of years that's where he really
got his break where he really first
started he and steven merchant before
they had a podcast they were on radio
and you can find these radio shows out
there it's
hundreds of hours worth of um ricky
gervais and stephen merchant and and
their producer carl pilkington people
know him um is there is out there
on the internet to download and i've
listened to that a number of times it's
hilarious i mean and then that evolved
into a podcast he was one of the very
many of us who do podcasting now can
thank ricky gervais because he was one
the one who really was first there
producing podcasts very early on
uh
and he had some of the the funniest
stuff i think ever now it is true that
the overwhelming majority of comedians
come from a particular side of politics
and that that's fine i mean there are
some comedians now increasingly that are
from the other side of politics but as i
say some of the best comedians you kind
of don't know it's like the best
teachers you kind of don't know what
their politics are right they don't
mention it they allow you to form your
own opinions i think ricky gervais is
kind of like this even though you know
he's sort of a
left-leaning
anti-human
certain guy i've talked about my
disagreements with your face before on
topcast
conan o'brien's the same kind of thing
adam's handler as well you know you you
don't you don't get the impression that
the
the the comedy all has to be about how
terrible
trump is how terrible the republican
party is how how stupid conservatives
are and that kind of thing okay that can
be part of comedy i don't mind
but when it's the entire act
almost
or every single night
it's the same theme
it gets boring okay so i think adam
sandler has a career because it's a
great stand-up comedian and he's
achieved what so many stand-up comedians
really want to achieve
which is to become
a
great actor as well most of them seem to
want to get into to film as well and any
i haven't seen many of these dramas but
but
um i've seen at least one and and he
seems to be a very good dramatic actor
as well there you go
even though that was tongue-in-cheek i
still
provided an answer all right i'm up to
keis
manz handen
keith's man man's handen uh at keith
manhanden
sorry for mispronouncing your name
and the question is how would you guard
against knowledge production that's
potentially catastrophic to humanity
for example the knowledge to create easy
nukes
a weapon of mass destruction that can be
made by anyone with a high school
diploma
okay well actually i think
i i talked about this actually uh
in
the podcast that will come out with iona
um
uh but again not until october um
i'm pretty sure yeah i touched on this
anyway
okay so
so that question there i just want to
emphasize
kind of a
an aspect of it it says again just to
repeat
how would you guard against knowledge
production
that's potentially catastrophic to
humanity for example the knowledge to
create easy nukes
okay
so this is very different to asking
how would you guard against
um easy nukes
how would you guard against knowledge
production that's potentially
catastrophic
is asking how would you guard against
knowledge production
there's no such thing as knowledge that
potentially couldn't lead to a
catastrophe
that's the nature of knowledge that's
the circumstance we are always in
so therefore my answer is i would never
guard against knowledge production
the
production of knowledge
is inherently unpredictable the creation
of knowledge is inherently unpredictable
you don't know
what the next bit of knowledge is that's
going to be
created
by virtue of the definition of what
created is okay coming
you know into into being
without precedent
so we can't know ahead of time because
we can't predict how knowledge
production is going to unfold over time
and this is why
prohibitions on certain kinds of
research is absolutely anathema to the
world view that i try to promote
people intellectuals scientists are very
kind of various kinds
entire podcasts
are devoted
to
listing problems people have
made careers out of this
out of telling us about the risks of
the ai apocalypse to come
catastrophic climate change
nuclear war
the next pandemic
nanotechnology getting out of control
the large hadron collider producing a a
a
a um
black hole a singularity and consuming
the world
name your bit of technology and your bit
of knowledge and you will have an
academic or an intellectual out there
somewhere or other telling you about how
it's going to go wrong
and some of them will even put
probabilities on this they'll pluck them
out of the air but they'll put
probabilities on this sort of stuff and
they'll use bayesian reasoning to try
and
impress you with how precise they're
being with these predictions
i want to say that and what i said to
iona i think
i wanted to make a separate podcast on
this and i may yet do this
is that those things are reasonable
problems to lists potential problems
okay
but i want to suggest that there is a
master problem
that subsumes all of these and makes all
these other ones look like peanuts
and that master problem is
slow progress
or the slowing of progress
because that is the one problem that
will guarantee the extinction of our
species all of these other ones
there is a risk
associated with them
but the risk is only made real once we
have created the knowledge that that
thing can actually be done
so once we have the knowledge to create
super intelligent artificial
intelligence
okay i i don't know that that's a thing
we will have the knowledge of how to
constrain that super intelligent
artificial intelligence as well
by the way i'm i'm saying super
intelligent artificial intelligence i'm
not saying artificial general
intelligence quite a different separate
thing categorically different as i've
said recently
these two things should be regarded as
the opposite of one another
artificial intelligence and artificial
general intelligence artificial
intelligence is that thing which must
slavishly obey its program
it's programming
it follows an algorithm artificial
general intelligence is precisely the
opposite it's the thing that
it must have the potential to disobey
that's not what artificial intelligence
does okay
it's a computer it's a computer program
it follows a computer program
whatever the case um
knowledge that is potentially
catastrophic
has to be pursued it's the only way we
can solve our problems because all
knowledge can potentially lead to the
catastrophe
we want nuclear physics
it would have been so much better if we
had nuclear physics early on does it
come with dangers of course it comes
with the danger of
nuclear weapons
but by the time you have
the capacity for a
easy nuke let's say let's think about in
the limit okay in the limit
could it be possible
well it will be is it physically
possible because you there
can be such a thing as a universal
constructor okay recent my most recent
podcast immediately before this one
touches on the universal constructor
from constructor theory
the universal constructor can construct
anything that's
physically constructable now one of
those things
would be a homemade nuclear weapon
if everyone in the future has
a a a
universal constructor you know the
generalization of a 3d printer
so that you as long as you've got the
program you enter the program into the
universal constructor and it's going to
build the thing for you
one such program would be a program for
a nuclear weapon
okay
there you go worried i'm not worried why
because
once you have the capacity to do that to
create that thing you also have the
capacity
to undo the problem
that would be caused by that thing in
time
what do i mean by that
well i can imagine a scenario innocent
in a world where
people have the capacity to 3d print
their own homemade nuclear weapon we're
in the far distant future in a realm of
kind of not science fiction but just of
of a distant future we can only begin to
guess at well let me begin to only guess
at it as well in this future we also
have a situation where
light speed signals detect
the
creation
of critical masses of fissile material
like uranium and plutonium
that once that certain amount of stuff
is created
in a city somewhere
an alarm goes off in an office somewhere
immediately
and immediately
at light speed
nano bots react and deconstruct the
thing using the same
3d printer
or something like that
once you've got the knowledge of how to
create the problem
the knowledge of how to generate the
solution also comes along with that
in almost all cases
and the key thing here is
the reason why
that is the case is because
the good guys the guys that live in good
guides good guys and girls whatever you
want to say the people
that
occupy
our civilization
a in a culture of criticism are the good
guys we're the good people we're the
ones that are making rapid progress so
we're going to get there first and
simply because of the fact we are the
good guys and we get there first we're
also looking for the solutions to the
potential problems that might arise from
a misuse of this technology
so i would never guard against knowledge
production quite the opposite i would
try increasingly to remove the barriers
to knowledge production which is what
we've got in place right now we're not
as dynamic a society as we could be
because of rules and regulations and
laws and
um
even even political
and moral ideas that tend to cause
people not to pursue research into
things that they otherwise would have if
not if not for social and political
pressure in a world where as the
question says the knowledge to create
easy nukes a weapon of mass destruction
that can be made by anyone with a high
school diploma
in that world where that's going on
anyone with a
college diploma
has even greater technology that can
undo
that particular issue
i can imagine all sorts of things
whatever it is whatever the technology
is that allows you to do that
is going to
exist in lockstep with a technology that
undoes it
you could imagine
you know
someone
with this high school diploma has made
this bomb and they're going to try and
set it off
you know in in in
in in their basement or something like
that
that again at light speed something
rather happens to prevent the thing from
going off
again we're in we're in a strange world
of of pessimism here but for whatever
problem uh there is a solution but the
one problem that is guaranteed
guaranteed to lead to the end of
civilization
is the one that slows progress problems
that slow progress
regulations and that kind of thing
uh
just a general attitude towards
um
progress technology knowledge production
that is pessimistic
is the biggest concern
for civilization for any dynamic society
because what it does is it reduces the
dynamism of that society
causing it to tend in the direction of
stasis and stasis is
the guaranteed way of going extinct all
other
civilizations that have existed before
ours
cease to be have ceased to be because
they could not solve their problem in
time they were insufficiently dynamic
some were near perfectly static
some were quite dynamic but again didn't
have the knowledge in time to solve the
problems they needed to
as david deutsch makes the point if we
want to be the one exception to this
then we have to continue to rely on this
one thing that we've got
this capacity to explain the world
around us to correct errors solve
problems and we need to do that rapidly
far more rapidly even than what we're
doing it now rapid as it is it needs to
go faster
because people are dying literally dying
and what i mean by that is we could have
effective immortality we could certainly
eradicate disease that will be done one
day by our descendants it will be done
one day by our descendants we will learn
the cures for all disease we will have
nano robots floating through our
bloodstreams or whatever repairing every
single organ
destroying every single virus and
and bacteria allowing us to be
effectively super people in eternal
youth
that's physically possible there's no
law of physics preventing that from
happen
happening and in a world where it's
physically possible and we want it it
will one day happen we just have to
create the knowledge somehow and any
way in which you guard against knowledge
production is a way in which you're
slowing that reality down
so it's urgent
it's urgent to increase the rate
of progress it's urgent to eliminate
barriers to creating progress it doesn't
mean that it's a free-for-all and we
recklessly go out um
doing anything enough people are making
that argument
enough people are making that arc it
seems like as i say every intellectual
that not only has it their own podcast
but that goes on a podcast that has an
interview that writes an article tells
us about the problems and the reasons
why we could should slow down progress
what's wrong with people
that arguments being made so i'm not
interested in making that case everyone
else has made that case even
other supposed optimists make that case
that there are dangers
whoopty do we've heard it before
everyone knows i want to make the case
that you need to embrace rapid progress
a far more rapid progress than what we
have now
rapid as it is
virtuous as our civilization is it could
be so much better so much better
so i think we should try harder
and in particular we should try harder
not to guard against knowledge
production but to do precisely the
opposite to to to
engage in practices and policies rules
and regulations which
allow
for individuals
businesses corporations to flourish far
more fully than they are far more fully
than they are
the people who are scared and
pessimistic and who
want to live in a world where
under the precautionary principle where
they're concerned about any particular
new invention creation discovery
give them new zealand
i don't know
let them stay at home cloistered i don't
mind
to just let the rest of
the great inventors creators
think as scientists of the world get on
with the project of
solving our problems faster producing
knowledge faster it does come with
hazards
but the greatest hazard the master
problem as i like to say
is slow progress
okay
next um is uh from dean of no at
so underscore irritable
his question is what is scientific
thinking
scientific
isn't a special kind of thinking
thinking is basically thinking
what is
rational thinking what is uh ways of
reasoning okay the science itself is
distinguished by
being a mechanism for correcting errors
in our theories of the physical world
we distinguish science from
all the other human intellectual
endeavors by whether or not the
explanations can be tested or not
anyone can engage in scientific thinking
everyone can be a scientist as everyone
can be a
philosopher
an intellectual a thinker a writer if
you're interested
now
so when it comes to scientific thinking
i get there are certain practices that
people engage in when they go through
the process of science
i mean but the most important one is is
is
creativity if you want to make progress
to
and that that means trying to identify
errors in existing theories
which means going about and finding
observations
inconsistent with existing theories so
therefore you have a problem
um
although people like sun i think i made
this point in my last podcast
people tend to have this idea that you
know
many a beautiful theory is slain by an
ugly fact well it's not entirely true
okay that that idea
many a beautiful theory is made
problematic by an ugly fact okay but it
could be the case that sometimes the
ugly fact is ugly by virtue of the fact
it hasn't been
uh
a care a carefully controlled
observation let's say that ugly fact
might be just a poorly collected piece
of data
so
this is part of scientific thinking
being able to figure out whether or not
when you encounter these problems out
there in the world in science
whether or not the problem you're
encountering indicates a true problem
with the theory that you have
or with the method by which you've made
the observation this is sometimes known
as the
jooheon jew him quine thesis
so i'm not going to give a
trope list of responses to a question
like that to what is scientific thinking
like
scientific thinking is the ability to
collect data very carefully and to
repeat your experiment and to ensure
that your conclusion follows validly
from the method that you're
controlling your variables and ensuring
you have one independent variable and
one dependent of okay all of that stuff
can be learned by looking up a textbook
on
you know high school science what i
would what i would say is genuine
scientific thinking is having a critical
attitude towards science not so critical
that you think that existing scientific
theories are
flawed because you've found
the new
next replacement of relativity theory
and you say
i've proved einstein wrong because i've
got a theory of magnetism which shows
how you can travel beyond the speed of
light
you might be right
but in general there is a reason why i
have this word crank and crack crack
cranks are sometimes important because
sometimes they turn out to be correct
but the true issue with cranks which is
a person who tends to have
uh
deep misconceptions about existing
theories
and therefore thinks that
an already refuted idea
in physics that usually occurs with an
already refuted idea from classical
physics is in fact true
and is able to overturn something in
general relativity or
the quantum theory okay this is where
scientific cranks within the area of
physics tend to come in
someone someone thinks that um
they've got a mathematical proof of why
relativity theory is incorrect
despite
[Laughter]
decades of experimental testing
testifying to the fact
that classical physics can is no longer
tenable okay classical physics of the
kind of newton okay newtonian mechanics
is no longer tenable because
it fails to account for observations
like a simple example what's going on
the large hadron
collider okay so
yeah
that's what a crank is so someone who
who is unable to distinguish between how
evidence distinguishes between theories
already guessed
how to use
evidence
it may not be a good scientific thinker
may not be employing good scientific
thinking so that's another part of
scientific scientific thinking is about
being certainly being creative being
able to to to think about why this is
very hard this this part is very hard
being able to look at existing
scientific theories and
thinking about
where there might possibly be errors
how to identify those errors and then
here's the really hard part
coming up with something objectively
better
this is such a rare thing inside this is
why a scientific thinker like albert
einstein
is rightly lauded as being the genius
that he is
because
prior to him
there wasn't really
anyone else
quite at the same level able to look at
something like
centuries of apparent apparent
experimental
evidence testifying to the correctness
of newton
and albert einstein coming along going
well you know there's these problems
here
let me completely from the ground up
from the foundations of physics
show you a new way a better way which
explains why newton appeared to be right
but where he's wrong
and why
and here's my new theory that's
scientific thinking par excellence
and it's a rare thing
because it's hard because you really
need to be passionately interested and
curious
and focused you know your your day after
day after day after day after day
on nothing but those problems
i can't do it okay i love physics but
not that much
einstein would just think and think a
thing you know finally you read read you
know feynman's account of his own life
and what he did and how he went about
thinking it's just day after day after
day of thinking of these particular
problems
most of us don't have that
okay most of us don't have we have our
interests okay i have my interest in you
know
a lot of people i understand would not
[Laughter]
not not have the same kind of interest
in
reading and rereading
david deutsch's books and karl popper's
books okay
it's a personality trait
so too with einstein focusing on
figuring i'm not comparing myself i'm
just saying that the scientific thinking
of that kind it's a rarity
as rare as any other quirky kind of
thing that people
tend to devote their
time with
and i say that because it's not a matter
of of intelligence
it's a matter of interest
there was einstein said this
words to this effect the feynman said
words this effect you know they they
didn't regard themselves as being
super intelligent particularly more
intelligent than than other people
around them
just that they were passionately curious
about certain things really interested
in certain things
all of that said i think there are there
are ways to improve your own thinking
there are common errors
common errors arising from
uh misunderstanding how knowledge is
generated and created and assessed
evaluated that kind of thing this is why
i think um if you're gonna learn if you
want to learn any
if you're interested in this world view
and you're interested in
in being a scientific thinker then i
think you could do worse than read
popper and deutsch and their their ways
of going about
understanding how science works once you
understand how science works then of
course you can be a better scientific
thinker
okay
next question
from an alan curtis at allen underscore
curtis
why is there only one monopolies
commission is that is that like a joke
you know they've got a monopoly on
monopolies what's the monopoly
commission let me google give me a
second
i can guess what it is i presume it's an
american thing
um
okay i can't monopoly's commission
monopolies commission an independent
body the german government has a
monopolies commission
um
the uk government has a competition
commission
and in australia we have something
called the the a triple c
the australian competition and consumer
commission okay yeah
right okay well i'm going to say the the
standard thing i say on these sort of
things
why is there only one monopolies
commission well it's almost like a joke
itself isn't it well they've got a
monopoly on monopolies commission should
we have another one so there's
competition in the monopoly commission
why isn't there a competitor to the a
triple c the australian competition and
consumer
thing
i think one's too many obviously i think
one's too many
there's no such thing as a monopoly i'm
going to take euron brooks line here
and many others who've made this point
before there is no such thing as a
monopoly
until
except for government and when
government gets involved in something
it doesn't have to be
that there is an actual
competitor in the market to whatever
your widget you're selling or service
you're providing it's just that
potentially there could be one
and potentially
there is no advantage
in law
that you have or that anyone has
but government sometimes intervenes in
the market and gives advantages usually
to big corporations right making it
harder for competitors to arise
so i think one monopolies commission is
too many
i think the government doesn't need to
be involved in the market broadly
speaking
and broadly speaking
businesses will
uh
compete
so i think
maybe this is a
there's a bit of a joke behind this um
[Music]
behind this this particular question of
course that that yeah there should be
competition
in monopolies commissions
there should be competition in
governments now now of course
i don't think there should be again
you're emphasizing again i don't think
there should be a government agency that
deals with ensuring there aren't
monopolies in the market because i don't
the only way to have a monopoly a true
monopoly in the market is to have
coercion and force being used in the
market in some way shape or form by a
company but in principle that is never
permitted it's against law the law to
use coercion force in other words
violence businesses can't do it google
cannot have a separate police force that
can go out and force you to do this that
or the other apple can't
the ford motor company can't et cetera
et cetera et cetera corporations can't
use force on customers or potential
customers
only the government can the government
has a monopoly on force now do i think
that there should be competition in
government there is that's what we call
nations yeah unlike your government
is one of the the virtues of the state
system right states in australia states
in australia are basically the same but
i know in america it's even it's more
virtuous in that sense that that
you know you don't like california you
don't like new york go to texas go to
florida
i hear about this a lot
that's competition in the in in the
market
to a certain extent on government now of
course you've got federal government
then you've got a bit of a problem
there's no competition there should
there be no there shouldn't be
and the reason that shouldn't be
is because you really do need a monopoly
on violence okay
i'm with rand on that i'm with rand on
this tradition of
law
justice police instantiates a whole
bunch of really important knowledge
about how to keep a society stable
under great change under rapid progress
i think i tweeted about this today
absolutely crucial that we want to
protect the means of error correction
protect the means of generating
knowledge really fast i'm all about
trying to make more and more rapid
progress
i don't think this can happen i don't
think rapid progress
would happen if we eliminated
governments i think it would happen more
quickly if we reduced government power
so that it was simply about protecting
the means of error correction protecting
the means of competition protecting
individual rights and the rights of
corporations and so on and so forth i
think then we'd have more rapid progress
yes absolutely
but should we eliminate and become
an archer capitalist
i can't see a path to that
insofar as there is a logical case to be
made for that the logical case seems to
be well if everyone was using their
reason and acting perfectly reasonable
all the time then we could do that
even then i'm not too sure like i mean
people as individuals have different
preferences and their preferences will
sometimes clash and there ultimately
needs to be a way in which to resolve
the conflict because
reason alone sometimes won't do the job
person a will be saying i'm being
perfectly reasonable person b will be
saying i'm being perfectly reasonable
there will still be a clash because of
creativity because reason is not itself
understood perfectly
and so
because of that we need this independent
arbiter call it the government and the
government will make mistakes and
whatever
okay fine
but it's the price of living in a world
where you want rapid progress because to
eliminate the government means we once
again devolve into these
competing either
smaller communities or individuals
themselves where
i think
my logic seems to lead me
to the place of violence the the
individuals absent the government
um
violence would increase not decreased
yes the government is a violent
institution it is the one that has the
monopoly on violence it uses violence
sometimes
um uh
immorally okay we've seen that
throughout covert i can agree with all
of that
but i still think that rapid progress is
best fostered
by
ideally
tending in the direction of minimal
government with a monopoly on violence
that
i don't know what you call the curve you
know but you know um
where at one end you have a super
authoritarian government and progress is
slowed because the government is overly
coercive
there's a sweet spot where the
government has a monopoly on violence
but otherwise minimal impact on people's
lives and in the market and so on and so
forth but then there's diminishing
returns once you take away the
government's ability to intervene in
conflict between individuals and
corporations and that kind of thing to
the point where if the government has
gone all together you have an anarchic
system where the strong men as rand
would call them the brutes
rule the day and then you have
as bad a situation
as as as violent and corrupt a situation
where
only the strongest
are able to
um
uh the strongest end up gaining
authority anyway so i guess it's like a
circle the government disappears what
happens is the the biggest strongest
gang then takes over
and you've got an authoritarian regime
once more anyway
so
at either end it's kind of a utopian
idea okay communism one utopia you know
if only the government took care of
everything we didn't have free markets
and the government was just distributing
everything
so that they were
you know you've got this utopia in other
words government will solve every
problem
that presumes that government can do a
perfectly erroneous in
a perfectly
capable job of
allowing for rapid progress it knows how
to solve the mistakes rather than
individuals even though individuals are
the ones that do the thinking
similarly
i think that the
the argument that well if you take away
the government
then we'll all just be using our reason
or we can have our own private security
and whatever i think it ignores the fact
that people are creative we are born
with different
we started i started this ama we're
talking about people are you know born
with different propensities grow up with
different propensities
you can't enslave people to
have non-violent tendencies some people
will just make the error of being
violent some people will make the error
of wanting to be
a dictator
and in a world without a government that
has long traditions of avoiding
dictatorships the dictator will arise in
an anarchic situation gangs will form
violence will happen
and
those people might very well say well
all we are is a big private security
company
but now you have to pay us protection
money now i don't know how
absent the government i've read the
literature from
the anarchists on this point i just
think they underestimate the power
of tradition
and the knowledge
of how society maintains its stability
while undergoing rapid progress
has instantiated in its institutions
that that it's just absolutely crucial
that we don't know how to
keep society stable
we don't know how civilization in the
west and the enlightenment has done what
it's done to the degree of fidelity
required that says we could do away with
these institutions now incrementally
should we undo the power of the
government absolutely okay i so i think
we should all stay on the same side
until then this is one of the great
problems i have with the
objectivists to some extent the the you
know the the anarcho-capitalist to
another extent uh you know someone like
me who's the berkian tradition whatever
you want to call it
says the institutions are important we
need to have a
more minimal government
we're all heading in the same direction
basically we are a very small minority
i would say when the rest are either
authoritarian type conservatives or
left-leaning socialist communists and in
either of those cases they like big
government and that's the tendency that
people are heading in right now it seems
especially in the socialist direction
so forget about infighting between us to
a large extent it should all be on the
same side to just say let's
incrementally
take back you know some of this
um regulation stuff
taxation stuff and allow for more
flourishing and if the advantages of
more flourishing are obvious which they
will be then hopefully more regulations
are removed more taxation is removed and
more flourishing follows but at the
moment that's not happening at all i
think one of the reasons is that
the the herding of cats issue
among
people who believe in or endorse liberty
who think liberty is the way to go
is an issue
[Music]
so many have
inter-need seen wars between themselves
you know the anarcho-capitalists will be
i think i said this in a recent podcast
as well it's almost like um you know
there'll be an objectivist um
uh debating in a narco capitalist in a
lecture theater somewhere when
when the genuine fascists or communists
bash the door in and take them both away
to the gulag so you know how about we
all just stay on the same side arguing
for
liberty and
individual human rights and free markets
and all that kind of thing
until we have this um
rapid deregulation of the market and the
decrease in taxation and so on and so
forth et cetera et cetera
but good question tongue and tongue
intake tongue-in-cheek question from
alan curtis i think i think is this my
last question i think it should be
anyway because something's been going on
for a long time
last question
rusty t at
restyton86
question is
i know deutsch describes his ideas as
footnotes to popper but didn't he make
some improvements like good explanations
are hard to vary or was that something
popper expressed too um
that's definitely a david deutsch
creation
discovery
this idea of the good explanations are
hard to ferry good explanations
explanation is central
to popper's philosophy absolutely
it's actually central to the fabric of
reality as well but it's one thing that
i kind of
missed to some extent you know i didn't
i didn't realize you know in the work of
popper in the early earlier work of
david deutsch that
explanation is there as being key
and
the reason why it became
sort of more prominent after the
beginning of finnish because
david actually explained what a good
explanation was because people had been
asking him what is a good explanation
you know can you define it so once once
we had this more refined understanding
of what a good explanation is
then we could say you know here's what a
good explanation is and this is why this
is what we're seeking in all these
domains science philosophy morality
everywhere we're seeking good
explanations that's how progress happens
they're the ideas that transform the
world as the subtitle
says to the beginning of infinity
so
on the one hand
yes papa talked about
science as an explanation seeking
exercise the critics of papa rarely
admit this right they think that popper
is just about falsification
people who claim to be papa scholars
people who
are critics of
papa
seem to say focus on this falsification
falsification is just the very useful
criterion which solves a particular
problem of how do you separate how do
you distinguish between science and
stuff that's not science
the stuff that's not science can still
be very important morality absolutely
crucial philosophy mathematics these are
all non-science it doesn't make them
unimportant and popper certainly didn't
think that he just said well look you're
all focused on trying to figure out how
to verify as true
or to be confident in scientific
theories what i'm telling you is that's
not important
the central essentially important thing
is can you test this thing
then it's a scientific theory okay well
not not entirely okay
it's a necessary but not sufficient
condition
for being a scientific theory
okay so
let's get on to the idea
david describes his ideas as footnotes
to papa didn't he make improvement he
did make improvements yeah absolutely
he's made improvements david is
a very modest person i would say um and
i think that's a that's a great virtue
some might not think it's a great virtue
now i happen to people
i don't think in general people don't
need to tout their own abilities and
discoveries not in general anyway
in fact it can be a good method actually
it can be a good method of error
correction to say
perhaps quite honestly look this is not
my original work i'm standing on the
shoulders of giants and so on and so
forth
if you're wrong about that
others will see it
they will find out and your legacy will
last in spite of your modesty and will
be
a more robust legacy actually
because you will stand tall in the
annals of history because you know you
kept saying throughout your life ah you
know i'm just
doing my best but it's just an
incremental improvement on what's gone
before
rather than going out there and saying
i'm the next einstein
if you talk yourself down when everyone
around you is talking you up well you're
all the larger for it i would say and
your work
tends to get noticed even more i think
that's the main thing
you brag and people will notice that
immediately
if you don't talk about yourself but
instead focus on your work
people will notice that too
and you will achieve
what it is you really want to achieve
or at least what you should actually
want to achieve which is namely for your
ideas to be tested
and solve problems
and improve the world to improve the
whole place
that's what you wanted that you didn't
want the credit necessarily you didn't
want the fame
fortune you want to improve the world
the other stuff will come
when the the world gets improved
i think that's the attitude to have so
you
so um
is is david just footnotes on papa no
but he says he is is he being dishonest
no i don't think he's being dishonest
but i think it's a virtue even though
the rest of us can disagree the rest of
us can absolutely disagree
and say that david's wrong about that
that people sometimes ask me you know
what do you what do you disagree with
david deutsch about perhaps that okay
david says he's just footnotes to popper
um
i don't think he is
there's not much i disagree with david
although
i think david prefers
tea bags you know if he has a cup of tea
he'll have a a tea bag of a certain kind
i prefer the leaves not the tea bags
yeah tea bat tea bag is the poorer
cousin of the the loose leaf tea i would
say so this is disagreeing with david
deutsch
but um now yeah so he's not
he he will say in many interviews i
think he said by now footnotes to papa
but yeah objective improvements on papa
um and and
has made a significant difference in
spreading
what is called critical rationalism or a
version of critical rationalism
i would just say actual epistemology
further than anyone
i'm aware of
certainly anyone alive today he's spread
epistemology further
actual ways of thinking that that are
more correct
than all those other
people out there promoting ways of
thinking ways of critically thinking
ways of being so-called rational and
avoiding errors okay because david will
say you know people are error-prone it's
just part of being a person okay
a natural state of things as being there
so so
david's modesty is not false modesty
he he i think he honestly believes that
it's
footnotes
to papa
he's being modest i think he's wrong
he's more than that but it's a re
there's a reason for being mod i think
there's a virtue in this because
it just means that the the the work and
the ideas stand
for themselves
so
we wouldn't we wouldn't want i don't
think it would do as well if he was out
there sort of saying basically you know
i'm poppa 2.0
i'm the intellectual inheritor of papa's
legacy and taking it further all that
sort of stuff i'm better than poppa
something like that he never would of
course and he he shouldn't and i i
personally shouldn't say that of david
that you know he's popper 2.0 because of
what i do in promoting the work
but others absolutely can make their own
judgments about this
ultimately history will tell i think and
history's already begun to tell that
story
so
yeah footnotes to papa well
if that's the case
you know people like to say you know
every other philosopher is footnotes to
plato don't they
clearly not true i mean
popper is not a footnote to plato
there's an objective improvement on
on plato correcting a lot of plato's
errors but but you know poppa
may very well not have existed if not
for plato
someone had to make those those first
steps
it's all a woven web of guesses and you
know
all these theories are misconceptions in
one way shape or form
we're moving from misconception to
better misconception and the best
misconceptions that are out there right
now
the most accurate ones the ones that
will allow you to make the most rapid
progress
are the ones
articulated by
in in the work of david deutsch i think
that's a lovely way to end it for now um
so that's the ask me anything episode um
if you'd like to donate um please feel
free to look me up on google patreon
topcast
and feel free to contribute i've got a
paypal donation button as well i think
you can donate via
twitter now i think there's also a on my
youtube channel there's like a super
thanks or something or other which um
i've never seen used
i don't know exactly how to use it maybe
if you press the button and money gets
sent to me i don't know
but until next time bye